Hello, everyone. Today I'm excited to
present ProCap: Projection-Aware Captioning
for Spatial Augmented Reality, a joint
work from Southwest University and
Westlake University.
I'll start with the motivation behind SAR
captioning, introduce our RGBP dataset
and ProCap method, then share
quantitative and qualitative results, and
finally summarize our contributions.
Spatial Augmented Reality projects
digital content directly onto physical
scenes, no headsets required. From
interactive exhibitions to industrial
design, SAR is transforming how we
blend virtual and real.
When setting a projector in physical
scene, the geometric and color distortion
is not negligible. Raskar and co-authors
enabled projection on non-flat objects
through geometric and radiometric
calibration. Grundhöfer and Iwai
developed photometric compensation using
pixel-wise thin plate-splines for
RGB sampling. Conversely, Huang and
co-authors proposed a calibration system
overcoming noise from parameter errors
and non-flat plates inherent in
traditional methods.
Beyond traditional SAR device, Nomoto and
co-authors used multiple high speed
projectors with each projector's
intensity control in dynamic SAR scenes,
achieving adaptive shadow removal. Huang
and Ling proposed an end-to-end
trainable model to apply an image-based
relighting, projector compensation, and
death/normal reconstruction
simultaneously, waiving the need for
additional optical devices, radiometric
calibrations, and structured light.
Kusuyama and co-authors proposed a large
aperture projection system using a large
format Fresnel lens to optically removes
the cast shadow and projection mapping.
In creative arts, SAR extends static
visual display toward the manipulation of
human perception and real time
interaction. Kaminokado and co-authors
used specular reflection to modify glossy
surface appearances, while Erel and
co-authors projected dynamic 3D content
onto hands. Deng and co-authors introduced
language guided image generation with
surface adaptation, and Peng and co-authors
developed high-speed, perceptually aligned
facial mapping.
Despite their visual appeal, most SAR
systems rely on high-fidelity pre-scanned
geometries and content specifically
authored for fixed scenes. To transition
to autonomous instruction-aware agents,
SAR must semantically understand arbitrary
scenes and project content based on user
intent and internal reasoning. Vision
language models present a promising
foundation for this evolution.
Consider this, a SAR scene contains
both a physical scene and projected
content. An ideal captioning system
should distinguish them. For example, "a
potted plant on a ledge" describes the
scene. "a dog standing in front of
a sink" describes the projection. However,
current VLM struggle with this.
Therefore, we identify three key
challenges. First, virtual physical
ambiguity. Without a mechanism to separate
projected virtual content from physical
environment, VLM suffer from virtual
physical ambiguity causing "merged"
descriptions. Second, perceptual
degradation due to projection. Various
geometric and photometric distortions
degrade image quality. This makes standard
VLM captioning unreliable. Third, lack of
SAR semantic benchmark dataset. There is
a lack of large-scale semantically
annotated dataset required to train and
evaluate models to interpret the complex
SAR scenes.
To address these, we propose: first,
ProCap framework two-stage pipeline
that decouples projection content from
physical scene via segmentation and
region-aware retrieval. Second, RGB dataset
, the first large-scale SAR
semantic benchmark with 65 scenes and
above 180,000 projections. Last,
dual-captioning protocol, task specific
tokens enable independent evaluation of
scene and projection descriptions.
RGBP stands for RGB + Projections.
We build RGBP dataset using
a projector camera system. In order
to simulate real-world distortions and
occlusions. We varied lighting, both
ambient light and RGB light panel
and geometry, projector's angle and
placement of physical objects.
Our RGBP dataset contains 60 seen
scenes for training and 5 unseen for
evaluation. We use COCO, nocaps and
WHOOPS! as projection sources. There are
more than 180,000 image pairs, each with
two ground-truth captions. Take 4 of
these scenes as an example.
In this figure, each column corresponds
to a different scene. Each sample
contains the physical scene Is, the
projected content Ip, and the image I
equals projected content + physical
scene. We can see the corresponding
binary mask Im for each SAR scene.
We again use an intuitive example to
demonstrate the process of physical scene
and projected content together
constituting an input image.
Unlike standard VLMs that produce one
merged caption, we want ProCap to
output two distinct captions. This
decoupling is essential for SAR
applications where virtual and physical
content serve different purposes.
Our goal can be briefly summarized as
follows: given I, we apply a
unified function F(I) to generate two
captions, where Cs represents the scene
caption and Cp represents the projection
caption.
The first stage is feature extraction and
segmentation. We use a frozen ViT-g encoder
to extract course features, refine them
via deconvolution, then apply a
lightweight segmentation module to
predict a course projection mask Im.
The second stage is region-aware
retrieval. We apply mask pooling to
isolate projection features, then use two
specialized Q-formers to generate
scene and projection embeddings, Qs and Qp
where Ts and Tp represent two sets of
learnable query tokens.
To combat projection distortions, we
retrieve clean semantic priors from an
external LVIS-based knowledge base. A
knowledge Q-former distills retrieved
object names into compact context
embeddings Qk, which augment the
projection features. Finally, we project
Qs, Qp, and Qk into the LLM's embedding space.
Then we get the final prompt H.
Task specific tokens [SCENE] and [PROJ]
condition of frozen decoder to auto
regressively generate the two captions
which ensure clear separation of
responsibilities. Operator [·;·] stands for
concatenation. Below it is the prompt
used by baselines in the experiment.
Finally a frozen LLM decoder D
generates the captions.
On 60 seen scenes with unseen
projections, ProCap variants outperform
off-the-shelf VLMs in scene
captioning. For example, ProCap-TinyLlama
achieves CIDEr scores about 70
on COCO and WHOOPS!, demonstrating robust
scene understanding despite projection
interference.
For projection captioning, the gap is
even larger. Baseline VLMS max out
at CIDEr about 11, while ProCap-
Vicuna-7B reaches 78.99. fine-tuned Qwen
3-VL on RGBP achieves 127,
highlighting the value of our data
set and region-aware retrieval.
On five unseen scenes, ProCap maintains
strong generalization, while scene
captioning sees modest gains due to
SAR complexity.
Projection captioning still shows
substantial improvements, confirming that
our retrieval mechanism works even with
novel content.
We evaluate ProCap-OpenLLaMA-3B against
FastVLM-7B across three seen scene and
three unseen scenes for the comparison
chart of qualitative analysis of scene
caption. The area with the first
background color represents the seen
scene, and the area with the other
background color represents the unseen
scene. We then highlight the important
words in GT and the corresponding correct
statements for both sets of models in
light blue, while the corresponding
incorrect statements for both sets of
models are highlighted in red. We can
find that our ProCap performs better.
Similarly, for the comparison chart of
qualitative analysis of projection
caption, we also indicate light blue
highlight and red highlight. In turn, it
can be found that the performance of our
ProCap is also better.
We conduct a series of ablation
experiments to validate the individual
contributions of the dual captioning
strategy, the projection segmentation
module, and the region-aware retrieval
mechanism. The results in Tables (a) to (c)
demonstrate the effectiveness of the
three parts, respectively.
Moreover, for physical scenes where
projected content perfectly aligns with
the surface of the projected object in
SAR applications, we further evaluated
ProCap-Vicuna-1.5-7B's understanding of this
SAR application. These are the specific
results of two sets of SAR scenes.
In summary, we contribute the ProCap
framework, the RGBP dataset, and a
dual-captioning evaluation protocol.
Limitations include sensitivity to
segmentation accuracy and reliance on the
LVIS knowledge base. Directions for future
work. Thank you for your attention. Please
visit our project page for paper code and
dataset.